---
title: What Does Privacy Mean?
description: We want encryption for trade. What is that?
date: 2023-04-25
authors: dangould
---

In February 2009 Satoshi
[posted](https://satoshi.nakamotoinstitute.org/posts/p2pfoundation/1/):
"The root problem with conventional currency is all the trust that\'s
required. ... **Before strong encryption**... privacy could always be
overridden by the admin based on his judgment call weighing the
principle of privacy against other concerns, or at the behest of his
superiors." Since the people we do business with and often even
strangers may override bitcoin privacy I have to ask, **if**
**communications privacy is protected by strong encryption, what keeps
the transfer of value private?** The other day, Max Hillebrand
[noted](https://damus.io/note1nxgydgv7aanqll7ge76nwquyku830k6ve7v28v75h4w5785yxktsaw6jug)
his "hope" that existing bitcoin tech has already achieved the same
level of security in response to Satoshi's words. Crypanalysis defines
security against specific attacks a system can be proven to defend from.
The tech on offer does not do this to my standard. I know we can extend
that tradition and analogy to define the makings of secure value
transfer and deliver it with guarantees.

<!-- truncate -->

## Guarantee some Privacy

The most basic guarantee is to break the most common pattern strangers
use to spy on bitcoin users. That's what payjoin does, and why it fits
into bitcoin exchange process to protect consumer privacy. This past
week we drafted the the payjoin integration with bitcoin exchange
software. The most advanced bitcoin exchange in Canada wants to upgrade
first. There's so much more here that I want to blurt out but I'll keep
it simple for now. **If you want payjoin in software you use, have the
developers visit [payjoin.org](https://payjoin.org) and message me.**

## Interview Inbound

In a recent interview I got into the details of so-called "taint"
analysis, how payjoin complements existing privacy tools, and the
history and progress of bitcoin privacy enhancement. Stay tuned for the
announcment.

## Payjoin on iOS, Android, and MacOS

BlueWallet fixed payjoin in their [latest
release](https://github.com/BlueWallet/BlueWallet/releases/tag/v6.4.1).
The [list](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/PayJoin_adoption) of payjoin
capable software continues to grow. Can't wait to see who supports
bitcoin privacy next.

Thank you for yours.

All the best to you,

Dan
